{:title "Using Perl on the Command Line"
 :layout :post
 :author "Jeff Terrell"
 :tags ["perl" "cli"]
 :toc true}

## Foreword

_I wrote this article circa 2006 on a personal website that is now defunct. I still use Perl on the command line frequently, so despite the fact that Perl (5) is pass&eacute; these days, I think this content is worthwhile enough to republish._

## Abstract

Perl has become a very popular scripting and text-processing language, yet
relatively few programmers and command-line geeks are aware of the usefulness
of Perl from within an interactive, command-line interface. In this tutorial, I
introduce several powerful command-line switches, including `-e`, `-n`, `-p`,
`-l`, `-a`, and `-F`. I also demonstrate `BEGIN{}` and `END{}` blocks. I
illustrate all new concepts with a variety of examples.

<!--more-->

## Audience

You are expected to be familiar with Perl. I will explain some of the more
esoteric language features used below, but you should already be pretty savvy
with the Perl language. If you want to learn Perl, I recommend O'Reilly's
excellent books, [_Learning Perl_](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/learnperl4/)
and [_Programming Perl_](http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/pperl3/). Also, most of
the information in these books is available from the perl manpages---and,
furthermore, it's almost as digestible as the books are. Start with
[perl(1)](http://manpages.org/perl) and go from there.

## The `-e` switch: inline scripting

Perl's `-e` switch enables _inline_ or _literal_ scripting. With `-e`, the
script which perl executes is actually on the command-line itself, rather than
being contained in a file. So we can say things like this:

```
$ perl -e 'print 1+1 . "\n"'
```

(**Note:** the initial **$** character signifies the shell prompt, and is not
part of the command. This is true for all the examples in this tutorial.)

Of course, if your perl script is that simple, you can just use bash operators
(assuming you're using bash or zsh---and if you're not, why not?):

```
$ echo $((1+1))
```

Then again, perl is a little more useful for simple arithmetic operations,
because bash doesn't support floating-point numbers:

```
$ echo $((22/7))
3
$ perl -e 'print 22/7 . "\n"'
3.14285714285714
```

Nevertheless, `-e` by itself is not very useful. It is, however, an essential
part of more advanced command-line tricks.

## The `-n` switch: implicit loops

Perl's `-n` switch implicitly wraps the literal script (i.e. the script
specified on the command-line itself) in a `while (<>) { }` loop. In other
words, `-n` tells perl: "do the following for every line of input".

For example, I have a few shell scripts for a project I worked on recently.
Some of these shell scripts call perl:

```
$ grep perl *.sh
arrange.conns.sh:    perl -pe 's/ [<>?] / /;s/ t \d+ \d+ -?\d+//' |
arrange.conns.sh:    perl -ne '
arrange.conns.sh:    perl -e 'while (<>) {
arrange.conns.sh:  perl -lne '
arrange.conns.sh:    perl -e '
cvec.norm.sh:perl -pe 's/(^DIR1|^DIR2|^CONC|^SEQ)/\n$1/' |
cvec.norm.sh:  perl -ne 'BEGIN{$/="\n\n"} print if /^SEQ|^CONC/' |
cvec.norm.sh:  perl -lne 'BEGIN{$/="\n\n"} @a=(split(/\n/,$_)); print if scalar(@a) > 1'
```

Let's say we wanted to count the number of characters on each of these lines.
First, we get rid of the file name. We could do this with `cut -d: -f2-`, but
we'll simply use GNU grep's `-h` option instead. Note how `-ne` scripts often
make heavy use of the `$_` variable, which contains each line of input.

```
$ grep -h perl *.sh | perl -ne 'print length() . "\n"'
51
15
26
14
14
46
54
76
```

## The `-l` switch: automatic newline handling

As it turns out, there's a slightly simpler way to do the above:

```
$ grep -h perl * | perl -lne 'print length'
50
14
25
13
13
45
53
75
```

The `-l` switch silently removes the newline character (or whatever `$/` is set
to, as we will see below) from the end of each line of input, and silently adds
a newline character to the end of each line of output. Note that the answers
are all reduced by one because each line is shorter by one character: the
newline at the end.

## The `-p` switch: implicit looping and printing

Perl's `-p` switch is the same thing as the `-n` switch with an additional
shortcut: a 'print' statement is implied, which prints the `$_` variable. I
find this particularly useful for simply applying a Perl regex style
substitution to each line. For example, say I have this (sanitized) output from
[tcpdump](http://www.tcpdump.org/):

```
$ cat tcpdump.txt
1177350516.293578 64.233.100.100.4663 > 152.2.100.100.25: .
1177350516.293598 152.23.100.100.3398 > 64.81.100.100.80: .
1177350516.293590 208.111.100.100.80 > 152.23.100.100.2706: .
```

And say I want to modify the local IP address (the one starting with 152.2 or
152.23) so that only the /24 subnet is printed. (This might seem contrived, but
I have actually done things like this in my research.)

```
$ perl -pe 's/ (152\.23?\.\d+)\.\d+\.\d+\b/ $1/' tcpdump.txt
1177350516.293578 64.233.100.100.4663 > 152.2.100: .
1177350516.293598 152.23.100 > 64.81.100.100.80: .
1177350516.293590 208.111.100.100.80 > 152.23.100: .
```

Or, say I want to separate the port number (the 5th dot-separated field) from
the IP address:

```
$ perl -pe 's/ (\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+)\.(\d+)\b/ $1 $2/g' tcpdump.txt
1177350516.293578 64.233.100.100 4663 > 152.2.100.100 25: .
1177350516.293598 152.23.100.100 3398 > 64.81.100.100 80: .
1177350516.293590 208.111.100.100 80 > 152.23.100.100 2706: .
```

## BEGIN/END Blocks

What if we have some code that we want to execute after (or before) the
implicit while loop in a `-ne` or `-pe` script? I bet you're not surprised that
Perl gives us a way to do exactly this: `BEGIN{}` and `END{}` blocks.

The most common use for this feature (at least that I've found) is summing a
bunch of numbers in a file. First, let's create such a file:

```
$ perl -e 'print "$_\n" for (1..1000)' > nums.txt
```

Now let's sum them up. If you're as clever as
[Carl Friedrich Gauss was in first grade](http://www.maztravel.com/maz/explain/counting.html),
you'll know what the answer should be. But for the rest of us, we'll accept
some help from Perl:

```
$ perl -lne '$c += $_; END{ print $c; }' nums.txt
500500
```

Let's have some more fun. Let's first generate a file with 1000 pseudorandom
numbers from 0 to 100:

```
$ perl -e 'print(rand(100) . "\n") for (1..1000)' > rand.txt
```

Now let's average all of these numbers. If the pseudorandom number generator
does a good job of picking numbers from a uniform distribution, we would expect
the average to be near 50, right? (This is statistics stuff; don't worry if you
don't understand it.) Well, let's see how well it does:

```
$ perl -lne '$c += $_; END{ print $c/$.; }' rand.txt
50.1172772862758
```

Not bad. If you're feeling ambitious, try doing the same thing with more and
more samples and see what happens.

## The `-a` switch: automatic field splitting

Perl's `-a` switch stands for "autosplit". When `-a` is specified, Perl
implicitly splits the input by whitespace, and stores the results in `@F`, as
if you had typed `@F=(split);` immediately after getting input. This behavior
is sort of like the standard
[`cut`](http://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/html_node/cut-invocation.html#cut-invocation)
utility (part of the GNU [coreutils](http://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/)
with two exceptions. First, `cut` can only split on single characters, whereas
Perl's autosplit switch can split on any regular expression. Second, `cut`
merely prints the columns, whereas Perl can do more complex processing.

For example, let's count the total number of bytes used in a directory:

```
$ ll
total 80
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel   2948 Oct 31 13:37 j1
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel   2948 Oct 31 13:35 lorem.txt
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel   3893 Oct 31 15:53 nums.txt
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel   2180 Oct 31 16:02 perl-cli.txt
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel  16909 Oct 31 15:59 rand.txt
-rw-r--r--   1 jsterrel  jsterrel    434 Oct 31 15:41 tcpdump.txt
$ ll | perl -lane '$c += $F[4]; END{ print $c; }'
29312
```

You know how the `ps auxwww` command often prints a lot of columns you don't
care about? Don't you hate that? Yeah, me too. Let's cut it down to the
essentials.

```
$ ps auxwww | head -n3
USER       PID %CPU %MEM      VSZ    RSS  TT  STAT STARTED      TIME COMMAND
jsterrel   428   4.3  1.4   381096  14288  ??  S    10Oct07  13:10.01 /Applications/Utilities/Terminal.app/Contents/MacOS/Terminal -psn_0_3145729
jsterrel 14973   2.5 27.1  2327152 284428  ??  S    20Oct07 227:02.88 /Applications/Safari.app/Contents/MacOS/Safari -psn_0_16646145
$ ps auxwww | head -n3 | perl -lape '$_ = join(" ", @F[ 1,10..$#F ])'
PID COMMAND
14973 /Applications/Safari.app/Contents/MacOS/Safari -psn_0_16646145
4009 /Applications/Adium.app/Contents/MacOS/Adium -psn_0_11927553
```

The `$#F` in the above command is a Perl shortcut meaning "the index of the
last element of the `@F` array". The full expression inside the brackets of
`@F[ ... ]` specifies an _array slice_: multiple elements of the array, forming
an array in themselves. Thus, the larger `@F` expression means "the array
consisting of the second element of `@F` as well as all fields from the 11th to
the last".

Lastly, note that you don't have to split just on whitespace. You can specify
any regular expression to the `-a` option by the `-F` option. See the
[perlrun(1)](http://manpages.org/perlrun) for more details.

## "Chunk" Processing: changing the input record separator

Often, in a Unix-style environment, you're dealing with data in which the
records are separated by newline characters. In other words, one line is one
record. Sometimes, however, it is more convenient to deal with records stored
in more general _chunks_ of data. For example, I often deal with chunks of
lines, where chunks are separated by a blank line (or `"\n\n"`). Thankfully,
Perl can operate on such data with relatively minor tweaks. Specifically, we
must change the `$/` variable, or the _input record separator_.

Let's go through an extended example with a file of junk "Lorem Ipsum" text,
generated from [lipsum.com](https://www.lipsum.com/feed/html). The text is
arranged in paragraphs. There are 5 paragraphs, each of which is on a single
line, and paragraphs are separated by a blank line. First things first, let's
split the paragraphs by sentence:

```
$ perl -pe 's/\. /.\n/g' lorem.txt > j1
```

Now, let's count the number of sentences per paragraph:

```
$ perl -lpe 'BEGIN{ $/ = "\n\n"; } @c = (split /\n/); $_ = @c' j1
11
16
11
15
16
```

Note that there is an implicit `scalar()` around the last `@c`. (We actually
could have done it just as easily without splitting the paragraphs into
sentences. I'll leave that as an exercise to the reader.) Now let's calculate
the average sentence length, in characters, over the entire text:

```
$ grep -v '^$' j1 | perl -lne '$c += length; END{ print $c/$.; }'
41.6666666666667
```

Nice. One more thing: let's calculate the average sentence length (in
characters) per paragraph:

```
$ perl -lpe 'BEGIN{$/ = "\n\n"} $c = 0; @s = (split /\n/); $c += length foreach @s; $_ = $c/@s' j1
30.0909090909091
52.125
33.6363636363636
46.6666666666667
40
```

Very cool. If you're feeling ambitious, calculate the average number of words
per sentence, per paragraph.

## Conclusion

Perl can be a very valuable multi-purpose tool to add to your command-line
toolbox. In this tutorial, we covered the essential `-e` switch, the implicit
line loopers `-n` and `-p`, the auto-field-splitting `-a` switch, `BEGIN{}` and
`END{}` blocks, and chunk-style processing by changing the
input-record-separator variable.
